hi Taiwan to hear from classroom medics
I'm here at the Women's Hospital in
Liverpool where I've come to see three
cytogeneticist s-- now I'm not sure if
you know what they are because I don't
so we only go to the genetics department
to find out hi my name is Sarah Smith
and I am a trainee clinical scientist
Hey I'm Kaylee Cameron I'm a trainee
clinical scientists in cytogenetics in
the NHS
my career path so far has been to do
GCSEs and then I did a levels in biology
chemistry and maths and then I went to
Liverpool University and did genetics
degree my favorite subject at school was
biology pretty much the whole way
through and I liked the other sciences
as well and I also really enjoyed
languages so let's get them to a level
just to give you a bit of variation and
for my degree I did medical genetics at
the University of Sheffield in school I
enjoyed most subjects my favorite was
probably the sciences and I wouldn't
really say I hated a subject although
religious studies wasn't really my forte
so this is a centrifuge and the blood
samples are actually put in here to spin
them down to remove the red blood cells
from a hypertonic solution
the samples are then put into a class
two safety cabinet and the hypertonic
potassium chloride solution is removed
from the sample in the bottom of the
tube is the white blood cells so it's
the chromosomes which we look at on the
metaphase
I knew obviously I liked em biology and
chemistry at school and I like I wanted
to continue with biology and and then
you didn't want to here as medicine so
had to look at what other careers were
available
sort of within the healthcare
professions but not being a doctor and
after did some work experience at the
feta genetics labs in Liverpool and
loved it and decided from that moment
that's what I wanted to do my moment of
inspiration was because I enjoyed doing
science at GCSE I followed it at a level
and then my a level teacher inspired me
to do genetics so
part is there we how much you results
impact on patients real-life patients
and knowing if you send them out an
abnormal result that's going to affect
them for the rest of their lives so I
think that's actually it's sort of this
sort of more emotional part of it that's
harder than the educational side of it
and obviously being in genetics we work
very case of genetic counselors who sort
of feud our results back to patients and
we work closely with them but because
you receive a such a wide variety of
samples from bone marrows from leukemia
patients through to prenatal amniotic
fluid samples we deal with a wide range
of consultants and including midwives
and so are sensitive happen a lot of
people in the NHS
so after the slides have been
but then go into the slide making room
where it slides are prepared with
patient details and then the cultured
cells are dropped onto the slide those
slides are then taken through to the
bandaging room where the dinner enzyme
called trypsin which strips away the
proteins from the chromosomes that
allows the stain to enter them and then
rinsed in a buffer and left in stain for
two minutes and this allows the banding
pattern we use for analysis to be put
onto the chromosomes
you
and I started my training in October of
last year so it should currently be
between two and three years to finish
the train and then you have two years
consolidation as well so after that I
should be a qualified clinical scientist
after the slides have been banded we
need to go and look at meta phases to do
an analysis and we used to use
microscopes to methodically scan the
slides looking for certain meta phases
to do our analysis that however took
quite a long time if thus if the meta
phases were rare
you
what we have now is a automatic machine
which scans the slides for us that we
tell the computer the type of metal
phases basically the quality of the meta
phases to look for the computer will
analyze the slides choose the best
quality meta phases and then we can
analyze those chromosomes and so it's it
does save a lot of time okay after all
the culturing harvesting slide making
bending scanning this is what our
ultimate aim is to have our pair
chromosomes bonnet on a screen so we can
compare the banding patterns between the
pair of chromosomes to look for any
differences so we can sort of diagnose
any abnormality there the classic one is
Down syndrome where we were looking for
an extra chromosome 21 so we'd have
instead of two instead of having two
copies of chromosome 21 we'd have three
copies of chromosome 21 so there you go
I think you'll agree that cytogenetics
have an amazingly varied job that it
forms a really vital part of the health
service in helping identify lots of
different types of genetic diseases if
you like this career
go to our website classroom Redax code
at UK and you can download some more
information from our careers page
you